

--- PAGE 1 ---
GANITA PRAKASH
Textbook of MathematicsTextbook of Mathematics
8
Part-II
Grade
0_Prelims.indd   10_Prelims.indd   1 20-Dec-25   2:18:48 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:48 PM


--- PAGE 2 ---
First Edition
December 2025 Pausha 1947
PD 2500T BS
©National Council of Educational 
Research and Training, 2025
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the
publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in 
which it is published.

The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page,
Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any 
other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 
700 114 Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar
Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar
Manager
Chief Production : Deepak Jaiswal
Officer (In charge)
Production Assistant : Ashwani Machra
Cover
Ritika B.
Illustrations
Chetan Sharma, Madhushree Basu
Layout
Creative Art Studio 
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT 
watermark
Published at the Publication Division 
by the Secretary, National Council of 
Educational Research and Training, 
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 
and printed at D.P. Printing & Binding, 
B-149, Okhla-I, A-1, New Delhi–110020
ISBN 978-93-5729-106-4
 65.00
0889 – Ganita Prakash
Textbook of Mathematics for Grade 8 (Part-II)
0_Prelims.indd   20_Prelims.indd   2 22-12-2025   12:00:4822-12-2025   12:00:48


--- PAGE 3 ---
FOREWORD
The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 envisages a system of 
education in the country that is rooted in an Indian ethos, and its 
civilisational accomplishments in all fields of knowledge and human 
endeavour. At the same time, it aims to prepare students to engage 
constructively with the opportunities and challenges of the 21st century. 
The basis for this aspirational vision has been well laid out by the 
National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-SE) 2023 
across curricular areas at all stages. By nurturing students’ inherent 
abilities across all five planes of human existence (pañchakośhas), the 
Foundational and Preparatory Stages set the Stage for further learning 
at the Middle Stage. Spanning Grades 6 to 8, the Middle Stage serves as 
a critical three-year bridge between the Preparatory and Secondary 
Stages.
The NCF-SE 2023, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students with 
the skills that are needed to grow, as they advance in their lives. It aims 
to enhance their analytical, descriptive and narrative capabilities, 
and to prepare them for the challenges and opportunities that await 
them. A diverse curriculum, covering nine subjects ranging from 
three languages—including at least two languages native to India— 
to Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences, Art Education, Physical 
Education and Well-being, and Vocational Education promotes their 
holistic development.
Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential 
conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different 
curricular areas, as these textbooks are intended to play a central role 
in mediating between content and pedagogy’s role that helps strike 
a judicious balance between direct instruction and opportunities 
for exploration and inquiry. Among the other conditions, classroom 
arrangement and teacher preparation are crucial to establish 
conceptual connections both within and across curricular areas.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training 
(NCERT), on its part, is committed to providing students with such 
high-quality textbooks. Various Curricular Area Groups (CAGs), 
which have been constituted for this purpose, comprising notable  
subject-experts, pedagogues, and practising teachers as their members, 
have made all possible efforts to develop such textbooks. Ganita 
Prakash, the mathematics textbook for Grade 8 (Part-II), is designed 
to make learning fun, engaging, and meaningful  —  just as in Part-I of 
the Grade 8 mathematics textbook. It continues to align with NEP 2020 
and NCF-SE 2023, and fosters a spirit of experiential and inquiry-based 
learning, a spirit already introduced in the mathematics textbooks for 
earlier grades of the Middle Stage. The textbook encourages students to 
0_Prelims.indd   30_Prelims.indd   3 20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM


--- PAGE 4 ---
iv
ask questions, think critically, and understand mathematical concepts 
through real-world contexts.
The textbook strives to inspire students to observe and explore 
patterns around them and to discover mathematical ideas on their own. 
Its content is carefully structured to support a joyful and progressive 
understanding of increasingly complex concepts, helping students 
transition smoothly into more advanced learning. It also attempts to 
integrate mathematics with other subject areas, such as Science and 
Social Science, along with cross-cutting themes like environmental 
education, value education, inclusive education, and Indian Knowledge 
Systems (IKS). In most places, each concept begins with a story or a 
puzzle that not only stimulates students’ thinking but also helps them 
appreciate the relevance and importance of the concept.
However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage should 
also be encouraged to explore various other learning resources. School 
libraries play a crucial role in making such resources available. Besides, 
the role of parents and teachers will also be invaluable in guiding and 
encouraging students to do so.
With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been 
involved in the development of this textbook, and hope that it will 
meet the expectations of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite 
suggestions and feedback from all its users for further improvement in 
the coming years.
 Dinesh Prasad Saklani
 Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational  
December 2025 Research and Training
0_Prelims.indd   40_Prelims.indd   4 20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM


--- PAGE 5 ---
ABOUT THE BOOK
Mathematics helps students develop not only basic arithmetic 
skills, but  also the crucial capacities of logical reasoning, creative 
problem-solving, and clear and precise communication (both oral 
and written). Mathematical knowledge also plays a crucial role in 
understanding concepts in other school subjects, such as Science and 
Social Science, and even Arts, Physical Education, and Vocational 
Education. Learning Mathematics contributes to the development of 
capacities to make informed choices and decisions. Understanding 
numbers and quantitative arguments is necessary for effective and 
meaningful democratic and economic participation. Mathematics 
thus plays an important role in achieving the overall aims of school 
education.
Mathematics at the Middle Stage is a major challenge and performs 
the dual role of being both close to the experience and environment of a 
learner , and being abstract. It performs the role of developing intuition, 
while also maintaining and emphasising rigour . It is enhancing critical 
and logical thinking, while also developing artistry and creativity, and 
a sense of elegance and aesthetics. Mathematics provides students with 
plenty of opportunities to explore and discover concepts on their own, 
while also teaching the best-known methods in the global repertoire of 
mathematics.
This textbook of Mathematics, Grage 8 (Part-II) attempts to address 
the goals and challenges of learning mathematics. The writers have 
aimed to strike a judicious balance between informal and formal 
definitions, and methods in helping students to develop both intuition 
and rigour . The textbook also provides numerous opportunities for 
student-student and student–teacher interaction in the classroom to 
promote active and experiential learning. A number of questions, 
puzzles, and interactive exercises are posed throughout the textbook 
to encourage constant exploration. Many of the questions are  
open-ended to stimulate classroom discussion.
Chapter 1: ‘Fractions in Disguise’ introduces percentages and several 
applications. Chapter 2: ‘The Baudhayana-Pythagoras Theorem’ 
explores the relationship between the side lengths of a right-angled-
triangle. Chapter 3: ‘Proportional Reasoning-2’ is a continuation of its 
counterpart  in Grade 8 Part-I, which discusses making pie charts and 
introduces inverse proportions. Chapter 4: ‘Exploring Some Geometrical 
Themes’ focuses on 3D geometry and fractals. Chapter 5: ‘Tales by Dots 
and Lines’ gives a different perspective on the arithmetic mean, and 
introduces line graphs as part of visualising and interpreting data. 
Chapter 6: ‘Algebra Play’ explores how algebra can be used to model 
and understand different scenarios. Chapter 7: ‘Area’ delves deeper 
0_Prelims.indd   50_Prelims.indd   5 24-12-2025   15:54:3624-12-2025   15:54:36


--- PAGE 6 ---
vi
into the areas of triangles and quadrilaterals. In all the chapters, an 
attempt has been made to emphasise connections with other subjects 
including Arts, Social Science and Science.
By weaving storytelling and hands-on activities together , as done in 
Grades 6 and 7, we hope that an immersive learning experience will 
be created that ignites curiosity and fosters a love for mathematics. It 
is hoped that teachers would give students the opportunity to discuss, 
play, engage with each other and provide logical arguments for different 
ideas, and find loopholes in arguments presented. This is necessary 
for the learners to eventually develop the ability to understand what 
it means to prove something and also become confident about the 
underlying concepts. The mathematics classroom should not expect a 
blind application of algorithms but should rather encourage students 
to find many different ways to solve problems.
As per the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, computational 
thinking has also been gently introduced through puzzles, games, 
and interactive exercises that encourage students on these aspects. 
Indian rootedness has also been kept in mind while giving contexts 
for different concepts. The contributions of Indian mathematicians 
have also been given as part of a problem-solving approach to make 
students aware of India’s rich mathematical heritage and its global 
contributions to mathematics.
The concepts and problems in this textbook are related to daily life 
situations. An attempt has been made to use contexts and materials 
that students are familiar with. Learning material sheets have been 
given at the back of the book that may be photocopied and used in 
the classroom. Exercises or activities are often given to encourage 
peer group efforts and discussions. However , this textbook intends 
to address the learning needs of a diverse group of students in the 
classroom. 
We have tried to link concepts learnt in initial chapters with 
ideas in subsequent chapters, to show the connectedness and unity 
of mathematics. We hope that teachers can revise these concepts in 
a spiralling way so that students are able to appreciate the entire 
conceptual structure of mathematics. We hope that teachers may 
focus more on the ideas of squares and cubes, exponents, evolution 
of numbers and other notions that are new to the students, and are 
foundational for further learning.
Finally, this textbook aims to be more than just a textbook — it is 
a passport to a world of mathematical discovery and exploration. 
Whether used in the classroom or at home, we hope that it  
inspires students to embark on their own mathematical adventures, 
empowering them to see the beauty and relevance of Mathematics in 
everything. With its engaging approach and comprehensive coverage 
0_Prelims.indd   60_Prelims.indd   6 22-12-2025   12:43:0422-12-2025   12:43:04


--- PAGE 7 ---
vii
of Grade 8 mathematics concepts, this textbook aims to captivate young 
minds and set them on a lifelong journey mathematical discovery.
I once again thank all the writers of and contributors of this textbook 
for their valuable contributions and service to the nation’s mathematics 
teachers, learners and enthusiasts. 
We look forward to your comments and suggestions regarding the 
textbook and hope that you will send interesting exercises, activities 
and tasks that you may develop while teaching and learning for future 
editions.
Ashutosh Wazalwar
Professor and Academic Convener
Department of Education in  
Science and Mathematics
National Council of Educational  
Research and Training
0_Prelims.indd   70_Prelims.indd   7 20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM


--- PAGE 8 ---
NATIONAL SYLLABUS AND 
TEACHING LEARNING MATERIAL 
COMMITTEE (NSTC)
 1. M.C. Pant, Chancellor, National Institute of Educational Planning 
and Administration (NIEPA) ( Chairperson)
 2 .  Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University (Co-Chairperson)
 3.  Sudha Murty, Acclaimed Writer and Educationist
 4.  Bibek Debroy, Chairperson, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime 
Minister (EAC –  PM)
 5.  Shekhar Mande, Former Director General, CSIR; Distinguished 
Professor, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune
 6.  Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor, University of British Columbia, 
Canada
 7.  Shankar Mahadevan, Music Maestro, Mumbai
 8.  U. Vimal Kumar, Director, Prakash Padukone Badminton Academy, 
Bengaluru
 9.  Michel Danino, Visiting Professor, IIT  –  Gandhinagar
 10.  Surina Rajan, IAS (Retd.), Haryana; Former Director General, HIPA
 11.  Chamu Krishna Shastri, Chairperson, Bharatiya Bhasha Samiti, 
Ministry of Education
 12.  Sanjeev Sanyal, Member, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime 
Minister (EAC –  PM)
 13.  M.D. Srinivas, Chairperson, Centre for Policy Studies, Chennai
 14.  Gajanan Londhe, Head, Programme Office
 15.  Rabin Chhetri, Director, SCERT, Sikkim
 16.  Pratyusa Kumar Mandal, Professor, Department of Education in 
Social Sciences, NCERT, New Delhi
 17.  Dinesh Kumar, Professor, Department of Education in Science and 
Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi
 18.  Kirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, 
NCERT, New Delhi
 19.  Ranjana Arora, Professor and Head, Department of Curriculum 
Studies and Development, NCERT (Member-Secretary)
0_Prelims.indd   80_Prelims.indd   8 20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM


--- PAGE 9 ---
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT TEAM
Members
Aaloka Kanhere, Project Scientific Officer, Homi Bhabha Centre for Science 
Education, Mumbai 
Amartya Kumar Dutta, Professor, Statistics and Mathematics Unit, Indian 
Statistical Institute (ISI), Kolkata
Amritanshu Prasad, Professor, Institute of Mathematical Sciences (IMSc), 
Chennai
Anjali Gupte, Principal (Retd.), Vidya Bhavan Public School, Udaipur , 
Rajasthan.
Aparna Lalingkar , Director, Aksharbrahma Consultancy, Pune
Ashutosh Kedarnath Wazalwar , Professor, Department of Education 
in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi — CAG (Mathematics) 
(Member Coordinator)
Geetanjali Phatak, Head, Department of Mathematics, S. P. College, Pune
H. S. Sharada, Assistant Mistress, Government High School, M. C. Thalalu, 
Mysore, Karnataka
Ishita Mukherjee, Senior Resource Person, CBSE, New Delhi
Kiran Barve, Faculty, Bhaskaracharya Pratisthan, Pune
K. V. Subramanyam, Professor, Chennai Mathematical Institute, Chennai
Madhavan Mukund, Director, Chennai Mathematical Institute, Chennai — 
CAG Chairperson (Mathematics)
Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University; and Co-Chairperson, 
NSTC
Nagesh Mone, Principal (Retd.), Deccan Education Society’s Dravid High 
School, Wai, Maharashtra
Padmapriya Shirali, Principal (Retd.), Sahyadri School, Pune
Patanjali Sharma, Assistant Professor , RIE, Ajmer , NCERT, New Delhi
Rakhi Bannerjee, Professor, Azim Premji University, Bengaluru
Ramchandar Krishnamurthy, Principal, Azim Premji School, Bengaluru
R. Ramanjuam, Visiting Professor , APU, Bangaluru and Professor (Retd.), 
IMSc, Chennai
Ravi Subramaniam, Professor (Retd.), HBCSE, Mumbai
Shivkumar K. M., Senior Consultant, Programme Office, NSTC 
Shravan S. K., Senior Consultant, Programme Office, NSTC
Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor , University of British Columbia, Canada and 
Member , NSTC 
S. Vishwanath, Professor, IMSc, Chennai
Vijay Ravikumar , Assistant Professor, Azim Premji University, Bengaluru
Vijayan K., Professor, Department of Curriculum Studies and Development, 
NCERT, New Delhi
V. M. Sholapurkar , Professor, Bhaskarachary
a Pratisthan, Pune
0_Prelims.indd   90_Prelims.indd   9 22-12-2025   12:44:0922-12-2025   12:44:09


--- PAGE 10 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
acknowledges the guidance and support of the esteemed Chairperson 
and members of the Curricular Area Group (CAG): Mathematics, and 
other concerned CAGs for their guidelines on cross-cutting themes in 
developing this textbook. During the development of this textbook, 
various workshops were organised and subject experts from different 
institutions were invited. The NCERT acknowledges the valuable 
views and inputs given by subject experts  —  Manjunath Krishnapur,  
Associate Professor , Indian Institute of Science; Ashwin Guha,  
Freelance Maths Educator, Bengaluru; Gowri Satya, Maths Educator, 
Seed2Sapling Education; Jonaki Ghosh, Professor , Lady Shri Ram  
College, Delhi; Sangeeta Solanki, TGT Mathematics, The Heritage School, 
Delhi; Rishikesh Kumar, Assistant Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi.
The Council acknowledges the efforts of Aman Bhargava, Data 
Visualisation Developer, for creating graphs based on the ‘Time Use 
Survey 2024’; and Arkaprovo Das, Cartographer, for making a map.
Acknowledgements are due for the academic and administrative 
support of Sunita Farkya, Professor and Head, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi.
For the chapter ‘Exploring Some Geometric Themes’, we borrowed 
extensively from the document Geometry and the Imagination by John 
Conway, Peter Doyle, Jone Gulman and Bill Thurston, for the material 
on visualising solids. We have also used ideas from the book The Heart 
of Mathematics: An Invitation to Effective Thinking by Edward Burger 
and Michael Starbird for the material on finding shortest paths on 
cuboids.  The comic in the ‘Fractions in Disguise’ chapter is adapted from  
xkcd.com/1102.
The Council appreciates the contributions of Sushmita Joshi, 
Senior Research Associate; Nazrana Khan, Senior Research Associate; 
Manvendra Pratap Singh Rathour, Junior Project Fellow, Department 
of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, for providing 
support in the development of the textbook. The NCERT acknowledges 
the contributions of Kishore Singhal, DTP Operator (contractual), 
Publication Division, and Abhilash Shukla, DTP Operator , DESM, NCERT, 
for all their efforts.
The Council acknowledges the efforts of Ilma Nasir, Editor 
(contractual); Aastha Sharma, Editorial Assistant (contractual); 
Adiba Tasneem, Ariba Usman, Jatinder Kumar, Praveen Kumar and 
Talha Faisal Khan, Proofreaders (contractual), Publication Division, 
NCERT. The Council also appreciates the efforts of Pawan Kumar 
Barriar, In charge, DTP Cell; Mohan Singh, Vipan Kumar Sharma, 
Bittu Kumar Mahto and Vivek Rajpoot, DTP Operators (contractual), 
Publication Division, NCERT, for all their efforts.
0_Prelims.indd   100_Prelims.indd   10 20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM


--- PAGE 11 ---
NOTE TO THE TEACHER
We hope that this textbook, Ganita Prakash, Grade 8 (Part-II), will serve 
as a strong support and guide to you in achieving the exciting task 
that you have before you  —  that of passing on the joy of learning the  
beautiful subject of Mathematics to the next generation.
This task calls for providing a fertile environment that allows for the 
flowering of mathematical thinking in the minds of students. Classrooms, 
where students just listen and write down whatever is being told to 
them or written on the board, are deficient in the conditions required 
for learning mathematics. Instead, classrooms need to be places where 
students are engaged in playing with mathematical concepts, finding 
and discussing patterns, and developing creative strategies together to 
solve problems. Students should also be posing problems to each other 
and discussing possible solutions with each other. In fact, these are the 
very conditions that have led to the development of the entire field 
of mathematics so far, and so one cannot expect students to pick up 
mathematical thinking and understanding without these conditions.
Fortunately, it is not difficult to create such conditions in the 
classroom. It just requires an interesting question, problem, pattern, 
or challenge to be thrown open to the students on a regular basis, and 
sufficient time to be given to them to play with, discuss, and work on it 
as a class or in pairs or groups. 
Along with it, an environment that accepts mistakes and 
acknowledges their importance in learning needs to be nurtured.
While creating the spark for initiating mathematical thinking in 
classrooms is not difficult, sustaining it may be challenging and may 
involve efforts from your side. Nevertheless, even if just the first part 
of throwing open a question, problem, pattern, or challenge is done at 
least once or twice a week, accompanied by sufficient waiting time from 
your side for students to play, discuss, and work on it, it can have a great 
positive impact on how the students view and approach mathematics.
It should be noted that this positive impact will not happen overnight. 
This takes time and depends on various factors, such as the number 
of opportunities you give for problem-solving, your patience, and the 
encouragement you give to the students.
To support you in posing problems, all the problems or questions 
in this book are marked using the icons 
 and . These icons 
are indicators of potential opportunities to start off a process of 
problem-solving and exploration in the classroom. You will find some 
of the problems labelled ‘
Math 
Talk ’. Such questions can especially be 
made as topics for classroom discussion.
An owl mascot appears at various points in the textbook to 
0_Prelims.indd   110_Prelims.indd   11 20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:49 PM


--- PAGE 12 ---
xii
highlight important mathematical processes, ways of thinking, and  
problem-solving approaches. These can be brought out during 
classroom discussions, both where the owl is present and also in other 
similar situations. 
In this grade, justification/proofs of mathematical statements find 
an increased presence. Students should be gently encouraged to 
deduce properties and not be forced to do it. Whenever students face 
challenges in doing it, encourage them to experiment and observe, and 
use their intuition in figuring out properties. Providing justification/
proof is a skill that takes time to develop.
To develop students’ mathematical thinking and understanding of 
concepts, a sufficient number of problems are given. Trying to ‘cover’ 
all of them must not happen at the cost of students not getting to spend 
quality time on playing with and discussing them.
It is important to understand that the exploratory problems are 
not only for promoting problem-solving skills; they also serve in 
strengthening procedural fluency when children start engaging in 
exploration.
Efforts must be made in making students independent learners. One 
essential aspect required for this is an ability to read and understand 
mathematical text. To promote this skill, students should be encouraged 
to read the book by themselves and in groups. Give opportunities for 
them to interpret what they read and express it to others. This will also 
address the big problem that students face in speaking mathematics 
and interpreting word problems.
This textbook contains a number of open-ended problems. It also 
contains new treatments of certain concepts. If you are not able to 
solve them or follow some of them immediately, it is perfectly okay! 
Not everyone knows everything. Along with trying to understand and 
reflect upon such content, it will be very useful to take it to the classroom 
and open it up for discussion. After the discussion, things that are clear 
and those that are not yet clear can be clearly summarised. This process 
itself can throw a lot of light on the content.
In these discussions, you can participate as a fellow seeker, and 
when students see a teacher seek and think to understand something, 
it sets a wonderful example for them.
It is hoped that you and your students will have a great and fruitful 
time using this textbook!
0_Prelims.indd   120_Prelims.indd   12 20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM


--- PAGE 13 ---
xiii
Summary of Key Points  
Time for Exploration
1. It is important to routinely pose new problems, questions, patterns, 
or challenges to the students and give them sufficient time to play 
with, discuss, and work on them, individually and in groups.
2. During this time, an environment that accepts mistakes and 
acknowledges their importance in learning needs to be nurtured.
3. There should be a culture where students pose problems to each 
other and discuss with each other various ways to approach the 
problems.
About the Problems in the Book
1. The exploratory problems in the textbook not only promote  
problem-solving; they also aim to strengthen procedural fluency 
when students start engaging in exploration.
2. Trying to ‘cover’ all the problems in the book must not happen at 
the cost of students not getting to spend quality time on playing 
with, discussing, and solving them.
Reading
1. Encourage students to read the textbook by themselves and  
in groups.
2. Give opportunities to them to interpret what they read and to 
express it to others.
Right of Not Knowing!
1. It is perfectly okay if some of the content is not understood 
immediately. Along with trying to understand and reflect upon 
such content, it can also be taken to the classroom and open it 
up for discussion. After the discussion, things that are clear and 
those that are not yet clear can be clearly summarised. In these 
discussions, you can participate as a fellow seeker, and when 
students see a teacher seek and think to understand something, it 
sets a wonderful example for them!
2. Learning is a continual process. Indeed, there is so much in 
mathematics that is still not known and requires further exploration!
0_Prelims.indd   130_Prelims.indd   13 20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM


--- PAGE 14 ---
A NOTE TO STUDENTS!
To be able to appreciate the art of mathematics, it is not enough to just 
be a passive spectator. You need to immerse yourself in its process like 
a detective getting into action to solve a mystery.
This is especially required when you see a new question or when 
a question arises from your own sense of wonder, or when you come 
across a new beautiful pattern. When you encounter these, pause your 
reading, and use your creativity to work out the question or understand 
and appreciate the pattern.
You will find that some questions are accompanied by their answers. 
Even if this is the case, it is worthwhile to work on the problems by 
yourself or in a group before you see the answer.
This will enrich your experience of going through the book!
Whenever there are questions coming up, you will see the icon 
 
and . This indicates that it is time fo r figuring things out!
indicates a main question and  indicates a sub-question. 
The icons for owls 
  and 
  suggest some important 
processes in the learning of mathematics.
Sometimes you will find many questions collected together in a 
single place under the title ‘Figure it Out ’.
Some questions are marked Math 
Talk . These questions are meant to 
be discussed and worked out with your peers.
Finally, there are questions marked Try
This . These questions 
demand more creativity to be answered, and therefore will also often 
be more fun to answer as a result!
0_Prelims.indd   140_Prelims.indd   14 20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM


--- PAGE 15 ---
CONTENTS
Foreword iii
About the Book  v
Note to the Teacher  xi
A Note to Students  xiv
Chapter 1  
Fractions in Disguise  1
Chapter 2 
The Baudhayana-Pythagoras Theorem  33
Chapter 3 
Proportional Reasoning-2  55
Chapter 4 
Exploring Some Geometric Themes  70
Chapter 5 
Tales by Dots and Lines  103
Chapter 6 
Algebra Play 135
Chapter 7 
Area 148
Learning Material Sheets
0_Prelims.indd   150_Prelims.indd   15 20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM


--- PAGE 16 ---
0_Prelims.indd   160_Prelims.indd   16 20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM20-Dec-25   2:18:50 PM
